[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LARRY GUTH: In
just the last year,
the sharp projection
theorem in R2 was proven.
And the proof is fairly big.
It's fairly complicated.
But for the last
three classes, I'm
going to want to
circle back to that
and talk about the new
ideas in that proof.
So it's been a while since
we talked about it, so I
thought we could start by--
we'll start just by writing
down what is the statement.
So this projection theory,
I like to think of it
as a geometric measure theory
analog of the Szemerédi--Trotter
theorem.
So I'm going to start by writing
down the Szemerédi--Trotter
theorem.
So sharp projection.
Start by writing down the
Szemerédi--Trotter theorem.
And there are a bunch
of different versions.
And I've picked out a
particular version that
fits into the way
the proof is going
to go for this sharp
projection theorem.
So it says the following thing.
So if E is a finite
subset of R2,
and then L is a set of
lines, let's say it this way.
For every x in E, we'll
have LxE is a set of S lines
that go through x.
And L is the union
over x at LxE.
So this set of lines L,
there's at least S of them
through every point of E.
So then, conclusion is
that the number of lines
is at least the minimum
of a couple of options.
There's the size of E times
S, or there's the size of E
to the 1/2 S to the 3/2.
We'll call this
option A and option B.
Option A, it's very simple to
imagine how this could arise.
I have a bunch of points,
set E. And for each point,
I have S lines through it.
And they're just all
different from each other,
so I get E times S lines.
Option B is more
special, more remarkable,
although not that complicated.
It's an integer grid.
And we talked about
it a couple times
in the beginning of the class.
So an integer grid, that
would make some sense.
So we might have a lot of
lines through each point.
But still, each line is
going through many points.
So the total number of lines
is a lot less than E times S.
And if you work it
out, you get this.
So that's the
Szemerédi--Trotter theorem.
We saw early on that it
implies a sharp projection
theorem for finite sets in R2.
And we're going to try to do
some analog for delta balls
in R2.
When we talk about delta balls,
it matters how they're spaced.
And the spacing condition
we're going to talk about
is the one that
Pablo introduced,
the delta SC condition.
So I'll make a definition.
So if E is a subset
of R to the D,
we're going to say that
E is delta S, C if--
so first of all, I'm
going to imagine here
that E is contained in a unit
ball or almost unit ball.
And then, if you take
E, and you intersect it
with a smaller ball, it's
basically a new ball.
If you take E, and you
intersect it with a smaller ball
and take the delta-covering
number of that,
then that should be smaller
than C times little r
to the S times the
delta-covering number
of the whole set.
So for any x and for any r
which should be at least delta.
So that's a delta S, C set.
It's a spacing
condition on the set E
that says that it's
not too concentrated
into any smaller ball.
So here is the statement of
the sharp projection theorem.
So the theorem of Orponen and
Shmerkin, Ren, Wang from 2024.
So if E in R2 is a delta
S, C set, then every x in E
will have a set
of tubes T sub x.
This is a set of
delta tubes through x.
And sorry, E is going to be--
this is just a notation choice,
but if I don't match my
notes, I'll go bananas.
It's a delta t, C set.
And so for each point, there's
a set of tubes through it.
And this set of tubes is
a delta S, C set in S1.
So let's make a picture.
So we have the set E,
which you may as well think
of as a set of delta balls.
So there's E. And then for
each of these delta balls,
it lies in a bunch of tubes.
And we'll repeat for
all of these other guys.
Maybe this tube keeps going
and goes through there,
and this tube there.
So if this is x, those
tubes there, that's Tx.
And they point in
different directions.
You can think of the directions
as being parametrized by S1.
And they are a delta
S, C set in S1.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: What if you
use multiple tubes that
are in the same
direction, slightly
offset of each other that--
I guess, less delta [INAUDIBLE]
LARRY GUTH: Yeah, so if you--
right, so if I had this point,
and then I had those--
oh, I see.
Yeah, we'll think of
those as the same tube.
OK.
So the question was, if
I have my delta ball,
could I have two
delta tubes going
through it that are going
in the same direction
or within an angle
delta of each other?
I'm going to think of those as
being basically the same tube.
Then T is the union over x of
Tx which could be smaller than
the sum of them because one tube
might be in Tx for two different
x's.
And the question is,
in terms of S and T,
how big does this need to be?
So then the conclusion is that
the size of T is bigger than--
OK, there's a little
complicated stuff--
C epsilon delta to the epsilon
big C to the minus order of 1.
And then there's
the minimum of k.
So the E times S corresponds
to delta to the minus T delta
to the minus S.
So this corresponds to
A. There's somebody that
corresponds to B, delta to
the minus T over 2 delta
to the minus 3T over 2.
That corresponds to B. And
there is a new thing, delta
to the minus 1 minus S, that
corresponds to C. Sorry,
it doesn't correspond
to anything.
There was no C up there, I
will call it C. So who is C?
So C is a new phenomenon
that has to do with the fact
that these tubes and balls
have a thickness, which
we didn't have up there.
So here, E could
just be any set.
And then T is a random set of
delta to the minus 1 minus S
or so tubes.
And the probability that a delta
tube goes through a given point
is delta.
So a typical point
Tx would essentially
be a random set of around
delta to the minus S tubes.
And a random set--
there might be
a couple that are close
together, but on the whole, that
would be a delta S set of tubes.
OK, so that's where this
new option comes from.
Cool.
AUDIENCE: Professor?
LARRY GUTH: Yeah?
AUDIENCE: In option B, is
one of the exponents supposed
to be an S instead of t?
LARRY GUTH: Yes, thank you.
That's supposed to
be an S. Correct.
So let's put these on top
of each other for a second.
So the size of E corresponds
to the delta to the minus T,
and big S corresponds to
delta to the minus little S.
And so those match up.
And then C is something new.
OK, good.
Now, I realized I
forgot one hypothesis
that I'm going to add.
And then we'll pause, and you
can look at these statements.
So we needed one more
hypothesis in our list
of hypotheses, which is that
this S should be bigger than 1.
You see, if I just had one
line going through each
of these points,
then I could just
have one line and a
bunch of points on it.
And 1 is not bigger than this.
So that's a special case.
And there is an
analogous condition here.
In our list of
hypotheses, we need
little S to be bigger than 0.
This corresponds to
having not just one
tube through each of these
points, but pretty many.
So that's the statement
of Szemerédi--Trotter
and the parallel statement of
this is the Furstenberg set
conjecture proven just recently.
So let's pause there
to digest and see
if there are questions or
comments about the statement
of this theorem.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: I'm still having a
hard time understanding what's
going on in case C. Would
it be possible to draw
a typical example?
LARRY GUTH: Yeah.
Let's draw case C So
E could go anywhere.
And then I am going to
draw a random set of tubes,
a bunch of them.
So here I go.
So I drew these tubes,
or I tried to do it,
without thinking at all
about where the points are.
There was nothing
clever going on.
But I drew a whole lot of them.
And 1 over-- a delta fraction,
if I draw a random tube,
the probability that it
goes through here is delta.
So if I draw M times 1
over delta random tubes,
I'll have about M of them
going through this point.
So let's say I do that.
So I have about M tubes
going through this point.
Now, what directions
will they point in?
Well, they'll point
in random directions.
And a random direction-- a
random set is a delta S, C set,
where's where delta to the
minus S is the number of points.
So that's why we have this.
OK, other questions or comments?
So now let's start talking
about the history of work
on this problem.
And going through the history
of work on the problem
will also be an excuse
to recap a big section,
big chunks of our class.
So history of work slash
recap of the class.
OK.
So first, I'll do what I'll
call classical bounds, which
are essentially due to
Kaufman and Falconer.
And they were written up in
the context of this theorem.
Kaufman and Falconer were
talking about projection theory.
This is a little
bit more general.
But they were written up.
Kaufman and Falconer were in the
'60s and '70s, so a pretty long
time ago, and then
adapted a bit by Wolff.
The first classical
argument is double counter.
There are actually two
slightly different ways
of doing double counting.
I'll tell you what they give.
The first way gives
that, if S is at least T,
then the number of tubes
is at least option A.
And this is sharp.
So let's think
about what it means.
So S is at least T. That means
that the number of directions
through each point is bigger
than the number of points.
So let me draw a little
picture to the side here.
So I have a few
points, not very many.
And then through
each tube, I'm going
to draw-- through
each point, I'm
going to draw a bunch of tubes.
And the number of
directions is bigger
than the number of points.
So I have a picture like this.
So what you see is that
most of these tubes
don't go through any other
point besides the initial point.
And that gives an easy estimate
for the number of tubes,
has to be at least the number of
points times the number of tubes
through the point.
There is another way
to do double counting.
And it says that, in general,
so just if S is bigger than 0,
which we've been assuming, then
the number of tubes is at least
delta to the minus 2S.
So let me just leave
this one as an exercise.
We've done some double counting.
Then there was a Fourier
method that we did in class.
And the Fourier method
showed that T was bigger
than the minimum of two things.
One of them is option
C, And the other one
is delta to the 1
minus S times option A.
And so this number
is smaller than 1.
So this is smaller than A.
So this isn't
sharp, unless we're
so lucky that S is equal to
1, in which case, this is
the minimum of A and
C, and that's good.
So this is sharp
if S is equal to 1.
So I won't redo this one, but
this is just the Fourier method
that we did in the
third week of our class.
So the classical methods
are occasionally sharp,
but usually not.
So another comment
about this story,
about why this is difficult, is
that some of these statements
are field-dependent.
They're true over R, but
they're false over C.
But others are
true in all fields.
So if we go back
to the beginning,
the Szemerédi--Trotter theorem
is true in both R and C,
although it's not
true in all fields.
It is the false in
some finite fields.
Well, as written, it's
false in all finite fields.
This theorem here is true over
R, but it is false over C.
And that counterexample has
kind of haunted all of us
who have been working on this.
And one feature of
these classical methods
is that they don't distinguish.
They work over R or C.
So to prove this theorem, we
have to distinguish R and C.
So we'll have to do
something which, in some way,
is different from these.
And the next phase
in the history
begins with Bourgain's
projection theorem.
And it's a phase that I'll
label as epsilon improvements.
So for quite a while,
actually, there really
was no progress on
these classical methods.
These classical methods
are from the '60s and '70s.
Wolff adapted them to
slightly more general setting,
but basically, there was no
progress for a long time.
And phase II is the phase
of epsilon improvements.
And the dates of this
phase are from around 2000
to very recently, whereas the
Bourgain projections theorem,
it implies, with a little
work but not that much work,
an improvement over
the classical methods
in a very particular situation.
So it says, if T
is 1, and S is 1/2,
then this number of tubes is at
least delta to the minus 1 minus
some epsilon for that.
So if you just plug in the
classical bounds up there,
it would give this.
And there's an
improvement, although only
for a rather
particular-- for one
particular choice
of the parameters.
So that was in 2000.
And the next improvement is a
theorem of Orponen and Shmerkin
from 2021.
And you can think of it as
a generalization of this.
It gives an epsilon
improvement, but in
not just for this special
value of the parameters,
but for lots of values
of the parameters.
So they proved that,
if T is bigger than S,
which is bigger than 0, then
the number of tubes is at least
delta to the minus
2S minus epsilon.
So delta to the minus 2S is
what you would get classically
by double counting.
It takes half a page.
And then, after 50 years and
50 pages, you can get this.
So in our class, we said a lot
about the proof of the Bourgain
projection theorem.
I actually wouldn't
say that we proved--
did every step, every detail.
We haven't proven
this, but let me just
say something about the proof.
So this is based on
Bourgain projection
theorem, plus a bunch of ideas.
And so an emotional
reaction that I
had to learning this and
going through it with you
is that it is hard work.
And also, epsilon
is really tiny.
It seems like the cleverer
we are, the harder we work,
we keep making epsilon smaller.
So this was the second
phase of the history,
where people were able to
make epsilon improvements.
I could also mention
other theorems
not about this exact problem,
but in a similar spirit.
So for many different
problems, it
was possible to make
an epsilon improvement
by using Bourgain's
projection theorem
and by using developing
ideas related
to the ones we put there.
So it's hard work.
Epsilon was really tiny.
But one positive
thing about it is
that it did distinguish R from
C. So both of these theorems
are false over C. So we
did start to do that.
Cool.
So this theorem
represents a third stage
in the history,
where we didn't just
improve by an epsilon over
the classical results,
but we improved substantially.
And in fact, people
proved the sharp result.
So sorry, I should
mention, this is sharp.
This is sharp for
any S and T. Yeah?
AUDIENCE: So [INAUDIBLE]
really sharp up
to the delta to
the epsilon factor?
LARRY GUTH: Yeah,
it's sharp up to this.
So it's sharp up to the
delta to the epsilon.
That's right.
In the future, I'm going to
abbreviate that mess by this
because we won't be at the level
of detail to have all of this
anyway.
So the story I wanted
to try to tell,
to explore over the
last three classes,
is how is it possible to get
from these epsilon improvements
to sharp theorems?
That's our theme for
the rest of the class.
And if I had to say it in
a couple of sentences, what
happened was people
found a way where
you can use an epsilon
improvement theorem,
and you can use it
over and over again.
And each time you
use it, you improve
a little bit the
exponent in your bound
until you bring the exponent
up to the sharp value.
Now, it's not at all
obvious how to do that.
And that's what
we're going to try
to explain, not
with all details,
but to make it seem like
a plausible approach
that you could carry out.
So any questions or
comments before we start?
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Does
doing that process
make the C [INAUDIBLE] constant
kind of correspondingly,
I guess, tiny compared
to the epsilon constant?
LARRY GUTH: Yeah, so I
think the question is,
as we use our epsilon
improvement theorem many times,
does that cause this to
become remarkably bad?
I think it does.
I think that this
is remarkably bad.
OK, great.
So today, my first goal is I
want to describe the simplest
example where you can get--
where you can use an
epsilon improvement
theorem to prove
a sharp theorem.
And then after that,
if we have time,
I will outline the proof
of the big theorem.
OK.
So simplest example
where epsilon improvement
leads to sharp out.
So this is a theorem of
Beck from around 1980, which
is about the incidences
of points and lines.
So it's in the setting of the
Szemerédi--Trotter theorem.
So it says, if E
is a subset of R2--
and it's not all on a line.
And in fact, I'll say at
most half of it is on a line.
So for any line L, L intersects
E is at most half of it.
Then, the conclusion is there
exists some point x in E
so that--
all right, so let me
make a definition.
So I'll draw a picture.
So this is E. So there's
our set E. Here's a point x.
Starting at x, I will draw
all the lines that start at x
and go through some other
points at E. So what's that set?
So I'll call it LxE.
So this is the set of
lines so that lines L--
so that x is in L, and L
intersect E is not just x,
so it has size at least 2.
Conclusion is there is a point
in E so that the size of LxE
is comparable to the size of E.
This is clearly a sharp
theorem because the largest
possible size that this
could be is the size of E.
Let me do a proof sketch.
And we'll-- so we'll see
that this follows from
Szemerédi--Trotter.
But we'll also see that we don't
really need the sharp exponents
in Szemerédi--Trotter.
We just need to have something
that's an epsilon better than a
simple bound.
That's why I've erased it,
but than the double counting
kind of bound.
So here we go.
So the sketchy part
of my proof sketch
is that I will suppose that
we are in the uniform case.
Namely, for every x in E,
I will suppose that Lx of E
has size around x.
So it's not really the case that
they would all be comparable,
but I'll just explain
that special case.
So now, how many lines
are there in total?
We can do a double count to
find the total number of lines.
So we're going to double count
pairs xL where x is in E,
and L is in our set of lines.
So our total set of
lines is going to be--
all right, let's do this.
So how big is LE?
Well, we could count the number
of these pairs in two ways.
We could count-- look at all the
points of E, and each of them
is in S lines.
Or we could say, look
at each of these lines,
and how many points
are in each line?
Well, the number
of the size of S--
the size of E intersect
L for a typical L and LxE
would be the size of E
divided by the size of LxE.
So I have all the
points in E. They are
divided among the lines of LxE.
Again, assuming it's
uniform, they would all
have around this size--
E over LxE, which is S.
So this is the number of points
times they're each in S lines
versus the number of lines times
they each have this many points.
So when we solve, we see that
the E actually drops out.
And we conclude that
LE is around S squared.
So our goal is to have
a lower bound on S.
So we want to have
a lower bound on LE.
And the Szemerédi--Trotter
theorem exactly gives us a lower
bound on LE, so we can use it.
So the Szemerédi--Trotter
theorem tells us that LE is
at least the minimum of S times
E and S to the 3/2 times E
to the 1/2.
But this LE is S squared.
So if you compare these, we
can get a lower bound for S.
In this case, we would have
S squared is bigger than SE.
So S is bigger than
E. And in this case,
we would have S squared is
bigger than S to the 3/2 E
to the 1/2.
And with a little algebra, that
is, again, S bigger than E. OK.
OK.
Right.
Now, I claimed that
we didn't need to have
this exact formula here.
Let me write down all
that we needed to know.
So what we needed
to know is just
that, if E is much bigger
than S, then the size of LE
is much bigger than S squared.
So that's a feature you can
read off of this formula.
If E is much bigger than
S, then either one of these
is much bigger than S squared.
And that's all we needed
to know because we
know that LE is only S squared.
So by the
contrapositive, we could
see that S is not
much smaller than ES.
It should be at least around E.
So this thing that
we needed to know
is very similar to the
Orponen-Shmerkin theorem.
E is much bigger.
So now let's look up at that
Orponen-Shmerkin theorem, says,
if T is bigger than S,
which is bigger than 0--
so T is measuring the
size of our set E,
and little S
corresponds to big S.
So that first
hypothesis is saying
that the set is much bigger
than the number of directions.
And then the conclusion is
that the number of lines
is much bigger than S squared.
That thing is this thing.
So this matches the theorem
of Orponen and Shmerkin,
the epsilon improvement theorem.
So that suggests an
idea that we could
use that epsilon improvement
theorem by Orponen and Shmerkin
and put it into an
argument like this one
and prove some kind of
generalization of Beck's theorem
that might have a sharp
conclusion, even though we stuck
into it just an
epsilon improvement.
And that actually works.
So I'm going to write
it down now for us
So this is called the continuum.
Or we could call it in
our class the delta ball
version of Beck's theorem.
So this is a theorem of
Orponen, Shmerkin, and Wang,
in '23, I think.
So we're going to translate
this theorem into the language
of delta S, C sets.
So we're going to say,
if E is a delta, u set--
I'm going to leave out the
C. Things will depend on C.
But E is a delta, u set.
So that's our set.
Now I need an analog
of this hypothesis
that E is not too
much in the line.
And the analog says
that E will be not too
much in any thin rectangle.
So we'll say if R is a rho by 1
rectangle, then if you take E,
and you intersect it with R,
take the delta-covering number
of that, that should
be kind of smaller
than the total
delta-covering number
So it should be rho to the A
to smaller than constant rho
to the A to smaller than the
total delta-covering number.
Maybe we can put
this back here also.
So who is eta?
At the very beginning
of this story,
we'll say, for every
eta bigger than 0.
So eta should be
a positive number.
So this is not super
strong condition,
but it's saying that E is
not heavily concentrated
into a thin rectangle
Then the conclusion is
there exists an x in E
so that the size
of LxE is greater
than the minimum of delta
to the minus u and 1.
So this would be--
sorry, not 1, delta
to the minus 1.
So what's going on here?
Our original theorem
would say that E
is at least the size of E.
And that's the size of E,
so that's what it's doing here.
On the other hand, if I
had every delta tube--
if LxE consisted of all
the delta tubes through x,
there would only be
delta inverse of them.
So it couldn't possibly
be bigger than this.
So we have it.
OK.
Cool.
So that's the statement
of the theorem.
And it is, again, sharp
because as we just explained,
this couldn't possibly
be bigger than this,
and it also couldn't
possibly be bigger than this.
So this theorem is sharp.
It's also false over C.
So the example over C
would be that the set E could
be R2, which is sitting in C2.
And if you imagine R2, if
you take any point in R2,
and look at all of the lines,
complex lines that go through
that point, there aren't--
each one of them goes through
many of the points of R2.
And the number-- there
aren't that many of them.
It would violate this.
So this theorem is in the
general spirit of projection
theory, it is a sharp theorem.
And it distinguishes
R from C. And I
believe it is the first such
theorem in the literature.
So we were trying for 20-plus
years to distinguish R from C.
For a long time, we could only
do it with epsilon improvements.
But this is not just
an epsilon improvement
on what was known before.
It's not just an
epsilon improvement
on what's true over C
And it's a sharp theorem.
Any questions or comments
about the statement?
AUDIENCE: So the
[INAUDIBLE] depends on eta?
LARRY GUTH: Yeah, so
if you unpack this,
it must depend on eta.
I think it is a constant
depending on epsilon and an eta,
delta to the epsilon, and
big C to the minus big 1.
So it depends on eta.
It's conceivable that
this depends on eta.
I'm not sure.
Other questions or comments?
So the idea in the first
place is to imitate this proof
of Beck's theorem, proof that
converts an epsilon improvement
on some simple estimate for
Szemerédi--Trotter into a sharp
estimate for this
Beck kind of thing.
But when we try to
do that, we will see
that there is an issue with it.
And when we flesh out
the proof a little more,
it will involve using the
Orponen-Shmerkin theorem not
just once, but many times
at many different scales.
So let's sketch the proof.
So the first plan is to
imitate the proof of Beck.
So let's carry
that out over here,
I'll put the Beck's proof up.
So attempt one.
So let's say that LxE
is a delta S, C set.
Now, that's related to
the cardinality of LxE.
This is a theorem about
What is the relationship?
Well, it implies that
the cardinality of LxE
is at least around
delta to the minus S,
but it could be much bigger.
So an example where these would
be about the same as if LxE
was like an
S-dimensional Cantor set.
An example where they
would be very different
is if LxE was very clumped.
So here's a piece of S1, and
maybe LxE is clumped like that.
So these dots represent LxE.
So if LxE was really clumped
into a much smaller interval,
then the S would
actually have to be 0.
This is not a delta S, C
set, except for S equals 0.
On the other hand,
the cardinality
of LxE in this picture is large.
And in particular, it's
much larger than delta
to the minus 0.
So this S is some
non-concentration condition.
And non-concentration forces
are set to be pretty big.
But it could also be
much bigger than that
if it was kind of clumped.
So let's try to
imitate our proof.
I'm going to suppose that
we're in the uniform case.
So all of the LxE have the
same S and the same size of LxE
We can do our same
double counting.
That part doesn't change at all.
And it gives us LE is
at least LxE squared.
OK.
Sorry, is approximately
LxE squared.
And so to get a
lower bound on LxE,
it suffices to get
a lower bound on LE.
So what happens here?
So now we can apply the theorem
of Orponen-Shmerkin, the epsilon
improvement, which I just
erased in a suboptimal use
of blackboards.
But what it says in
this case is that,
if S is smaller than the minimum
of u and 1, but bigger than 0,
then we get LE is at least delta
to the minus 2S minus epsilon.
So this would be
the classical bound.
And then we have this.
And then we're
interested in LxE.
That tells us that LxE is at
least delta to the minus S
minus epsilon.
So let's take stock.
If S were equal to the
minimum of u and 1,
then LxE would be at least
delta to the minus S.
That would be the
bound we want to prove.
So in that case, we
would be very happy.
Now suppose S is in this range.
Well, then we get this bound.
This bound is a tiny bit
better than this bound.
But that's all.
This argument didn't work
so nicely as that argument,
because in that case,
there was no distinction
between cardinality and the
value of S. In that case, this
was the same as this.
So we would get a
contradiction at this moment.
And we could conclude
that, actually, S
is the minimum of u and 1.
So we did learned something.
If LxE were kind of spread
out, then you might hope that
the cardinality would be
about delta to the minus S.
And in that spread-out
case, then we could get--
it would follow that S
the minimum of u and 1.
So we see this corollary
if LxE is a delta,
S set, and the size of LxE is
around delta to the minus S.
Then we would get
that the size of LxE
is greater than around
the minimum of delta
to the minus u and delta to the
minus 1, and we would be happy.
But it's a big if.
And we don't understand
yet very well
what might happen if these sets
were a little more clumped.
Cool.
So let me put up a summary
of what we've learned so far.
So lemma-- if S is bigger than
0, and a typical LxE is delta,
S, C, then size of a typical LxE
is at least delta to the minus S
minus epsilon--
or sorry, yeah, if
0 is less than S,
is less than the
minimum of u, 1.
So the proof of this theorem,
we don't have it yet.
We have this lemma.
The proof of this theorem is,
by bootstrapping this lemma,
using it many times at
different scales and locations.
So we are, effectively,
using the epsilon improvement
many times, not just
once, and at many scales.
So let's do a sketch of
this bootstrap iteration.
So we're going to suppose that
LxE, first of all, is uniform
and also that it is
delta S, C for some S
which is bigger than 0.
It's the start of our bootstrap.
So because it's uniform,
and it's a delta,
S, C set, then it follows
that, if you take its rho
neighborhood, then this is a
rho, S, C set for every rho.
And now we can apply our lemma.
And the lemma tells us that
the cardinality of LxE,
the rho-covering number of LxE,
is at least rho to the minus S
minus epsilon.
So rho to the minus S is what
we get just from being a rho,
S, C set.
But actually, it has to be a
little bit bigger than that
by our lemma.
And that's true for every rho.
And now, since we
have a uniform set,
and since these rho-covering
numbers are a little bit bigger
than expected, it tells us that
LxE is a delta, S plus epsilon,
C set.
Actually, here I
needed to put 0 is less
than S is less than
the minimum of u and 1.
All of these are hypotheses of
our lemma, so we use them here.
Now this is our
starting hypothesis.
So now we can iterate.
So S keeps getting bigger
and bigger, as long
as it's smaller than
the minimum of u and 1.
And so it will approach
And then we're happy.
So unlike in the proof
of Beck's theorem,
we had to use this
lemma many times.
We used it at many
different scales.
And also, we had to use
it over and over again.
And each time we used it,
we improved this exponent
a little bit until the exponent
approached the exponent
that we had in the
classical Beck's theorem.
And so this is sort of
typical of this new paradigm,
that you can take an
epsilon improvement result
and use it over and over again
to keep epsilon improving
something until the thing
reaches the sharp value.
Now, you might be wondering
how we started this argument.
We needed to start with an
S That was bigger than 0.
And not every set is a
delta, S, C set for any S.
So to start the argument,
we observe that we had this
non-concentration in
rectangles condition--
rectangles condition here,
that our set is not too
much in any rectangle.
We haven't mentioned
that hypothesis yet.
We use it here to get started.
So to start with,
non-concentration in rectangles
easily implies that LxE
is a delta, eta, C set.
Because so if E looks like
so, there's not too much of E
in any rectangle.
There's our x.
Therefore, there aren't too
many of these rectangles.
You can't have-- if
you had a lot of LxE
in a small angular range, it
would mean, you had a lot of E
in a small rectangle.
And that says this
doesn't happen.
OK, cool.
So now we have
sketched the proof
of the continuum Beck's
theorem, the first sharp theorem
in projection theory
distinguishing R from C.
So let's take a couple
of minutes to digest,
see if you have
questions or comments.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: I guess the
second step of the proof
would be LxE rho.
Is that the intersection of LxE
with a kind of rho-radius ball?
LARRY GUTH: Sorry.
So LxE rho is the rho
neighborhood of LxE.
Actually, you can
also erase the rho.
Maybe that's the
best thing to do.
So LxE is a delta, S, C set.
And if it's uniform,
it's also a rho, S,
C set for all the bigger rho's.
AUDIENCE: So rho
greater than delta?
LARRY GUTH: Yeah,
for all rho greater.
Yeah.
Yeah, thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Yeah, so recap, so we don't--
actually, yeah, we don't
need to mention this.
So say it again.
So LxE is uniform set.
If it's delta, S, C,
then it's also rho, S,
C for all the bigger rho's.
And so then we get
these covering numbers
and then get it there.
OK.
So let me share a
personal reaction.
So when this paper
came out, first of all,
I was very impressed
because it was--
I had been wondering
about this for many years.
And it's the first sharp
projection-type theorem
which distinguishes R from C.
But I also felt kind of unsure
whether this would open the door
to prove sharp results for
things like the Furstenberg set
problem.
Maybe it's a sharp
result, but maybe it's
about a kind of thing that
somehow is more approachable.
It was well known classically
that an epsilon improvement
of something implied a sharp
version of the incidence
geometry, something here.
And that's just not the
case for Szemerédi--Trotter.
Szemerédi--Trotter is not
known to follow from an epsilon
improvement on some
classical thing.
And so it wasn't clear to me
if this would open the door
to prove sharp theorems
about all the things
we most cared about.
So in the rest of this
class, what I want to do
is to give an outline of the
proof of the Furstenberg set
conjecture and the
different ingredients that
go into it, of which this will
turn out to be an important one.
Cool.
So the first thing to
say is that this proof
breaks into cases according to
the way the set E is spaced.
This delta, t, C set, that
definition, on the one hand,
it's a good definition.
But under the umbrella
of delta, t, C sets,
there are several different,
quite different, ways
that the set E could be spaced.
And we have to pay
attention to them.
And we have to treat
them in different ways.
So let's explain that.
So we're going to split
into cases according
to how E is spaced.
So first of all, let's
assume that E is uniform.
And now I mentioned the
word "uniform" above,
but now I'll remember, recall
exactly what is uniform.
So first of all,
our delta is going
to be capital delta to the
m, where m is a large number.
And uniform means that,
for every j going from 1 up
to m and for every q which
is a delta to the jq, then,
when I take my set, and
I intersect it with q,
and I cover it
with cubes or balls
at the next smaller
scale, delta to the j
plus 1, that is around Rj.
So I'll draw some
pictures in a moment.
The smallest this Rj could be is
1, and the biggest it could be
is big delta to the minus 2.
Actually, yeah, let me
say a little bit more.
So the delta
covering number of E
That's going to be the
product j equals 1 to m of Rj.
And another thing we can say is,
if I were to take the product j
equals 1 to capital
J of Rj, that
would be the covering number of
E at scale delta to the capital
J.
And that should be--
so let's say-- so
if E is a delta,
t, C set, then this should
be at least 1 over C
delta j to the minus t.
So that gives some information
about these products.
And being a delta, t, C set is
equivalent to this information
about these products.
And so there are many
ways that they could look.
Let me put up a couple of
examples which also should,
hopefully, clarify
everything on this board,
and then we pause for questions.
So the first example
that I want to put up
is that all the
Rj's are the same.
So Rj is delta to the
minus t for every j.
And then you'll see
that this will be OK.
And I'd like to visualize
this in two ways.
So the first way I'd like
to visualize is as a tree.
So in my visualization,
I picked that delta is 4.
No, delta is 16.
No, sorry, delta is 1/4,
and t is going to be 1.
So in my visualization, delta
to the minus 1 is going to be 4.
I'm going to have a tree.
So that would be R1
guys coming out of it.
And then each of
these have R2, which
is also 4, branches coming up.
I won't draw that, but
they're all the same.
Now, to the next stage
of our visualization,
we started with a square.
And we cut it into smaller
squares of side length delta.
So that looked like this.
This is stage 1.
And R sub 1 is 4, so we took
four, so maybe these four.
Stage 2, inside of each
of those four squares,
I took each of them, and I cut
them into a 4x4 grid of smaller
squares.
And I took four of them.
So I'll do the cutting
carefully here.
So maybe I took those four.
And then down here, I took four.
And over here, I took four.
So our set looks something
like that at stage 2.
And then you could keep going.
So this is the first example.
It's called the AD regular
example, Ahlfors-David regular.
Ahlfors and David
are two people who
worked on stuff that
is related to this.
And the word "regular," I think,
here refers to the fact that all
the scales are the
same as each other.
Now let me show you
an opposite extreme.
So this one is called
the well-spaced example.
So in the well-spaced example
Rj is as big as it could be,
its maximal value,
for some range of J.
And then Rj is 1 for
larger J. So as a picture,
it would look like this.
So we're going to visualize
with big J as 1, big M is 2,
like over there.
So we'll have two stages.
And so our first stage
is that R1 is 16.
I won't draw it up.
And then R2 is 1.
So from each point here, we
have just one going down.
So the tree looks like
this instead of like that,
a lot of branching
at the beginning
and then no
branching after that.
What does it mean our
set looks like in space?
Well, first, stage
1, I take my square,
and I break it into 16
squares of side length 1/4.
And at stage 1, I
select all 16 of them.
So the picture looks like this.
Now, at stage 2, so I have
cut my square into 16 squares
of side length 1/4, and I
look inside each one of them.
I cut that into 16
squares, the smaller size.
And I pick one of them, and
I do that in all the ones
I selected at stage 1,
which is all of them.
So this set looks like this.
So this is called
the well-spaced set.
So I could fix a t.
I could make a
delta t well-spaced.
I can fix t and delta.
I can make a delta
t well-spaced set
or I can make a delta
Ahlfors regular set.
And they look rather
different from each other.
And there's also a
gray area in between.
So this one is distinguished
by saying that the points are
the most separated.
So if these points
were like electrons
that were sitting in this ball,
and they repel each other,
they would come to a
position that's like this.
It would be well-spaced.
And this one is
distinguished by being--
this is the most clumped which
is allowed for a delta t set.
So this isn't the most
clumped possible set.
I could take these
delta balls, and I
could smoosh them all there.
That would be more clumped.
But if it's a delta t set,
it's not allowed to do that.
And this is the most
clumped that it could be,
subject to the definition
of a delta t cell.
OK, cool.
So there's a range of
spacing conditions.
And this hopefully gives
a sample of them. yeah?
AUDIENCE: Is there some
sort of energy condition
or a quantitative measure of
the clumping that would allow
you to separate the two cases?
Because they're
both delta, S, C.
LARRY GUTH: Right.
So the question, is there
a quantitative measure
of clumping or concentrating
or spacing that would
allow us to distinguish them?
I think the nicest
way to do that is
this list of Rj's, or perhaps
this list of this list
of these numbers here.
So it's not just a single
number, but it is quantitative.
And if you're willing to have
a list of numbers describing
your set, then it
does quite a good job.
It's really a modern
innovation to focus on that.
In previous times,
people wanted to describe
the spacing of their set
with one number, which
would be like the dimension
of the set or the energy
or something.
And when they were describing
with just one number,
then it was lumping
together these two
rather different behaviors.
And it turns out to be
important to un-lump
to prove this theorem, at least
with the proof that we have.
OK, good.
So now I can write down
the outline of the proof.
So here is the outline of the
proof of the main theorem,
or let me say, of the
Furstenberg conjecture.
OK.
So first main ingredient is a
theorem of Orponen and Shmerkin
from '24.
And they proved that the
Furstenberg conjecture
holds in the AD regular case.
So this is based on and
builds on the stuff--
builds on the stuff
we talked about today.
So it builds on the continuum
Beck theorem of OSW,
which, in turn, built on the
epsilon improvement of OS,
which, in turn, builds on the
Bourgain projection theorem.
It's not at all obvious
given the Beck theorem, just
an ingredient.
And so there are also
some great ideas in that
we'll talk about next time.
But also, it involves
some special structure
of the AD regular case.
We'll talk about that
a lot on Thursday.
The second ingredient is a
theorem of Guth, Solomon, Wang.
So I was involved a little bit.
It's is a slightly
older theorem.
It's from 2019.
And we proved that the
Furstenberg conjecture
holds in the well-spaced case.
And it's based on
the Fourier method.
This is much less
difficult than this.
It's the Fourier method
that we explored for a while
with a little bit of
extra something something.
How do you take advantage
of being really well spaced
instead of just AD regular?
OK.
Good.
So now, when I presented
these two possibilities,
the way I had
thought about them is
that these are just two opposite
ends of a whole gray spectrum.
And so if you have a method
that works in one end,
and you have a method that
works on the other end,
I guess you might hope to
have a general thing that
sort of combines them both
and works for everything.
But there's still all
this stuff in the middle.
And it turns out-- and I think
this is surprisingly important
in its own right--
that the proof of the
theorem actually reduces
to just those two cases.
So the third ingredient
is a multi-scale argument
which shows that the
Furstenberg conjecture actually
reduces to the AD regular
case and what they
call the semi well-spaced case.
So this is a small
generalization
of this case that
can be handled by,
more or less, the same methods
using Fourier analysis.
OK, cool.
So in each of
these, I think there
is something worth talking
about and worth remembering,
an idea that could
be useful certainly
in other problems in
this field and maybe
in other parts of math.
We have two more classes,
so I'll [INAUDIBLE].
My goal is, in the two classes,
to say something substantial
about each of these three ideas
which fit together to prove
the Furstenberg conjecture.
OK, good.
Any last questions or comments?
Mm-hmm?
AUDIENCE: Within each of
these individual cases,
how much variation is there
in the structure of the sets?
Because it's not
really [INAUDIBLE]
kind of rearranging [INAUDIBLE]
points within one of the boxes
does a lot or does a little.
LARRY GUTH: Yeah.
OK, so the question is--
so we've taken all
the delta, t sets.
We have then divided
them according
to their branching function.
And one extreme is the AD
regular and one extreme
is the well-spaced.
And then the question is, if
you look among different sets
with the same
branching function,
like among different
AD regular sets,
how different are
they from each other?
Well, I will try to answer
that by drawing a second AD
regular set in blue that we can
compare to the one in white.
So I should pick four big
squares, and in each of them,
I'll draw four dots.
I would say that the sort of
spacing feel of these dots
is the same in all the
examples that are AD regular.
On the other hand, actually,
let me draw another example.
This would be-- here's
another example.
So something else is a little
different about this example.
And so yeah, so there are
some more delicate things that
could be different
about the different AD
regular examples, even though--
so what's the same about
them is you give me a radius,
your favorite radius.
You stick down a ball
of that radius and count
how many points are in there.
That will be the same
for any AD regular set.
But there are delicate things.
Actually, another very
important, delicate thing
that would be different
is-- so let's now think
about the well-spaced set.
An example of a well-spaced
set is an integer grid.
That has some
special properties.
It has translation symmetry
and stuff like that.
A typical well-spaced
set will still
have one point in
each of these boxes,
but it won't have
additive structure.
It won't have
translation symmetry.
It won't have-- and it
won't have very many lines
that go through many points.
So those kinds of
things are different
among the different sets with
the same spacing condition.
OK, well, let's stop
there for today.
And we'll talk more about these
things on our last two classes.